Rigveda
Rig	References	Notes
Samhita (Mandala Krama)	Vishnu (steps): 1.22,[24] 1.154,[25] 6.69,[26] 7.99,[27] 7.100;[28] Bali (tribute): 5.1.10,[29] 7.6.5;[30] Brhaspati / Vrihaspati: 4.50[31]	
Aitareya Brahmana	Vishnu: 1.1.3, 3.2.18, 3.3.32, 6.3.15; Bali (tribute): 7.5.29[32]	
Samhita
ato devā avantu no yato viṣṇurvicakrame |
pṛthivyāḥ saptadhāmabhiḥ ||

idaṃ viṣṇurvi cakrame tredhā ni dadhe padam |
samūḷhamasya pāṃsure ||

trīṇi padā vi cakrame viṣṇurghopā adābhyaḥ |
ato dharmāṇi dhārayan ||

The Gods be gracious unto us even from the place whence Vishnu strode
Through the seven regions of the earth!

Through all this world strode Vishnu; thrice his foot he planted, and the whole
Was gathered in his footstep's dust.

Vishnu, the Guardian, he whom none deceiveth, made three steps; thenceforth
Establishing his high decrees.

—RigVeda transliteration of Book 1, Hymn 22, Verses 16-18[33]	—RigVeda translation by Ralph T.H. Griffith (1896) of Book 1, Hymn 22, Verses 16–18[34]

Rigveda page in Sanskrit
Roy states that the Rigvedic passages referring to Vishnu's three strides are obviously the nucleus, out of which the legend of the Dwarf was created. But the Rigveda, however, does not describe Vishnu as dwarf or Vamana'.[35] W. J. Wilkins agrees, stating that in regard to the Vishnu strides of the Rigveda, 'in these verses there is probably the germ of the Dwarf Incarnation'.[36]

In regard to the above-quoted verses, it is commonly accepted that there are Seven Continents or 'regions of the earth'. A. Glucklich adds that 'In the Matsya Purana, for instance, there is a seven-part map of the world ... [it has] one centre, where an immense mountain – Mount Meru (or Maha Meru, Great Meru) – stands ... The continents encircle the mountain in seven concentric circles ... It seems clear that the Himalayas were the approximate location of Mt. Meru'.[37]

In regard to the three steps of Vishnu, Glucklich points out that in some legends of Vamana and the Asura-King Bali, that 'the first [Step] covered the entire earth, the second covered the atmosphere, and the third measured heaven in its entirety'.[37] M. Haug, in his translation of the Aitareya Brahmana (1.1.5) of the Rigveda, clarifies that the 'three worlds' often means the Ground (Earth), the Air (Atmosphere), and the Sky (Heavens).[38] Three steps thus encompasses all of physical existence (although in some Puranic accounts Vamana does so in only two steps). D. Goodall also relates more a mystical interpretation of what 'three worlds' symbolises, as provided by the Brihadaranyaka Upanishad, including Mind, Speech, and Breath (see Upanishad section, below).[39]

Notably, Muir also states that although 'Adabhya' can be translated as 'who cannot be deceived' (as provided by Griffiths, above), it can also be translated as 'the unconquerable preserver', and notes that the 'idea of Vishnu being preeminently the preserver of the universe, which became current in later times [i.e. in the Trimurti], may possibly have been derived from this verse'.[20]

Aitareya Brahmana
In the words indras cha Visno yad apaspridhetham [RV 6.69.8] (there is hinted) that Indra and Vishnu fought with the Asuras. After they had defeated them, they said to them, "Let us divide!" The Asuras accepted the offer. Indra then said, "All through which Vishnu makes his three steps is ours, the other part is yours." Then Indra stepped through these (three worlds), then over the Vedas, and (lastly) over Vach.

— The Aitareya Brahmana, translated by Martin Haug (1922), Book 6, Chapter 3, Section 15 (pp. 275)
The concept of Vishnu obtaining the three worlds for the Devas from the Asuras in three steps is clearly explained in the Aitareya Brahmana. The Rigveda Samhita verse referred to (6.69.8) regarding Indra and Vishnu battling the Asuras states 'Ye Twain have conquered, ne’er have ye been conquered: never hath either of the Twain been vanquished. Ye, Indra-Vishnu, when ye fought the battle, produced this infinite with three divisions'.

Should the Hotar [Vedic Priest] repeat that verse (tan vo maho), he would prevent the rain from coming, for Parjanya has power over the rain (but there is no allusion to him in that verse). But if he repeat the verse pinvanty apo, where there is a pada referring to rain (the third atyam na mihe), and one referring to the Marutas [188] (the storms accompanying the rain, in the first pada), and the word viniyanti, "they carry off," which refers to Vishnu, whose characteristic feature is said to be vichakrame, i.e., he strode (thrice through the universe), which meaning is (also) implied in the term vinayanti, and (where is further in it) the word, vajie, "being laden with booty," referring to Indra (then the rain would come).

— The Aitareya Brahmana, translated by Martin Haug (1922), Book 3, Chapter 3, Section 18 ('On the Origin of the Dhayyas, their Nature and Meaning', pp. 126–127)
The Maruts, referred to as 'the sons of Rudra' are frequently mentioned throughout the Rigveda, including in relation to the above quotation, producing rain (1.38.7).[40] Indra is the god of rain and as stated in the Aitareya Brahmana, 'rain gives food' (2.5.41; pp. 106). This is elaborated upon in the Aitareya Aranyaka (Aranyaka 2, Adhyaya 3) which states "the seed of the devas is rain. The seed of rain is herbs. The seed of herbs is food".[41] Additionally, in the Bhagavad Gita, Krishna states 'All living bodies subsist on food grains, which are produced from rains. Rains are produced by performance of yajna' (3.14).[42]

Sama Veda
Sama	References	Notes
Samhita	Part 1: Book III, Chapter I, Decade II (3.1.2.9); Part 2: Book VIII, Chapter II, Decade V (8.2.5)[43]	From Rigveda 1.22
Pancavimsa Brahmana	Vishnu: XII.13.22, XX.3.2; Bali (tribute): XV.7.4[44]	
Samhita
Through all this world strode Vishnu: thrice his foot he planted, and the whole
Was gathered in his footstep's dust.

Vishnu, the guardian, he whom none deceiveth, made three steps, thenceforth
Establishing his high decrees.

— Sama Veda, translated by R. T. H. Griffith (1895), Part 2, Book VIII, Chapter II, Decade V, Verses 1-2
The translator, R.T.H. Griffith, states in his introduction to the Sama Veda that it 'is made up of hymns, portions of hymns, and detached verses, taken mainly from the Rigveda'. The above-quoted Sama Veda hymn, for example, is taken directly from Rigveda hymn 1.22.

Pancavimsa Brahmana
Prajapati created the (domestic) animals (the cattle, the cows). These, being created, left him. Through the agnistoma, he did not reach them, nor through the uktha(-land)s, nor through the sodasin, nor through the night (-rite), nor through the twilight(-laud), nor through the asvina (-sastra). In regard to them, he said to Agni; 'Try thou to reach these for me’. Agni was not able to reach them through (the first extra-laud:) the nine-versed stoma, the jarabodhlya-(-saman)... He said about them to Vishnu: ‘Try thou to reach these for me’. Vishnu reached them, through (the fourth extra laud) the twenty-one-versed stoma, through the varavantiya (-saman), he restrained them (from passing away farther, avarayata): with the verse: ‘Here did Vishnu stride’, he strode.

— Pancavimsa Brahmana, translated by W. Caland (1931), Chapter XX, 3.2
The terms 'stoma' and 'saman' from the above-quoted Pancavimsa Brahmana refer to mantras and hymns, such from the Sama Veda.[45][46]

The Jaiminīya Brahmana has a similar verse (1.3.3.2; also of the Sama Veda) which omits Vishnu's strides but explains the Varavantiya saman as 'He who desired cattle should apply the Varavantiya Saman. Prajapati created the animals. Having been created they ran away from him. By means of the Varavantiya Saman he held them back. Because he held them back (avarayat) therefore the Varavantiya is called the Varavantiya. The application of the Varavantiya as the agnistoma Saman is made in order that the animals remain present and do not run away'.[47]

In the Taittiriya Samhita 5.5.8 (Black Yajurveda) Varavantiya is also explained as 'Prajapati created Agni; he [Agni], [being] created, went away from him; him [Agni] he [Prajapati] checked (avarayata) by the Varavantiya, and that is why the Varavantiya has its name. By the Cyaita he congealed him, and that is why the Cyaita has its name. In that he reverences, with the Varavantiya, he restrains him, and by the Cyaita he congeals him'.[48]

The strides of Vishnu are thus referred to in regard to restraining animals from running away from sacrifices (often in rituals rice-cakes and other plant or milk-based foods would be symbolically sacrificed while the actual animals they represented would be left unharmed). This idea of being restrained by Vishnu strides may be linked to Bali often being restrained or bound in the legend of Vamana.

Yajur Veda
Yajur	References	Notes
Śukla (White)	Vajasaneyi Samhita	2.25,[49] 5.15,[50] 16.30[51]	2.25 is recited during the 'Vishnu Strides' in the yajna detailed in SB 1.9.3.
Shatapatha Brahmana	Vishnu: 1.2.5,[52] 1.9.3,[53] 2.3.1.12;[54] Bali (tribute): 1.3.2.15,[55] 1.5.3.18,[56] 1.6.3.17,[57] 11.2.6.14[58]	1.9.3 uses the formula from Vajasaneyi Samhita 2.25.
Krishna (Black)	Taittiriya Samhita	VIshnu: Kanda 1: (strides) 2.13.i, 3.4.d, 3.6, 6.5, 7.5, 7.6, 7.7, 8.10, 8.15; (dwarf) 8.1, 8.8, 8.17;[59] Kanda 2: (dwarf) 1.3, 1.5, 1.8; (strides) 4.12, 6.12;[60] Kanda 3: (strides) 2.6, 2.10, 2.11, 5.3;[61] Kanda 4: (strides) 2.1, 2.9; (dwarf) 5.5;[62] Kanda 5: (strides) 2.1, 6.16;[63] Kanda 6: --;[64] Kanda 7: --[65]	'Kanda 1: 2.13.i' means 'Kanda 1, Prapāṭhaka 2, Section 13, verse i'.
Bali (tribute): Kanda 1: 6.2[59]
Taittiriya Brahmana	VIshnu: Book 1: 1.2.5.1; Book 2: 2.4.3.10; Bali (tax / tribute): Book 2: 2.7.18.3[66]	
White Yajurveda: Vajasaneyi Samhita
Homage to him with braided hair and to him with shaven
hair, homage! homage to the thousand-eyed and to him
with a hundred bows, homage!
To the mountain-haunter and to Sipivishta, homage!
To the most bountiful, armed with arrows, homage!

Homage to the short, and to the dwarf, homage, homage to
the great and to the adult, homage! Homage to the full-grown
and to the growing, to the foremost and to the first
be homage.

Homage to the swift, and to the active be homage, and to
the hasty and to the rapid mover be homage! Homage to
him who dwells in waves, and in still waters, to him who
dwells in rivers and on islands.

— Vajasaneyi Samhita, translated by Ralph T.H. Griffith (1899), Book 16, Verses 29-31
In regard to the above quotation, Aiyangar states that long (i.e. including braided) hair indicates Munis, and shaven hair indicates 'an ascetic of the order of sannyasin'.[67] Roy argues that in 'the Satarudriya hymn of the Yajurveda [i.e. Vajasaneyi Samhita, Book 16, as quoted above], Rudra is referred to as vamana. Rudra is said to preside over the asterism of Ardra and may, therefore, be understood to denote the star'.[35]

However, the terms 'thousand-eyed' (i.e. Purusha, see second account of Vamana in the Harivamsa, below), 'mountain-haunter' (e.g. Rigveda 1.154, above), and 'Sipivishta'[68][20] given in the above-quote all also apply to Vishnu. In addition, the Shatapatha Brahmana (attached to the Vajasaneyi Samhita), relates the legend of Vishnu as a Dwarf, not Rudra /Shiva. Regardless, in the Puranas there are legends of both Vishnu and Shiva incarnating as Brahmin-dwarfs, and the above-quoted hymn provides the essential ingredients: the Brahmin, the Dwarf, and the concept of growth.

White Yajurveda: Shatapatha Brahmana
See also: Shatapatha Brahmana

Vishnu dwarf incarnation (Vamana), Pala period, Bengal – BHU Museum
The gods and the Asuras, both of them sprung from Pragâpati, were contending for superiority. Then the gods were worsted, and the Asuras thought: 'To us alone assuredly belongs this world! They thereupon said: 'Well then, let us divide this world between us; and having divided it, let us subsist thereon!' They accordingly set about dividing it with ox-hides from west to east.

The gods then heard of this, and said: 'The Asuras are actually dividing this earth: come, let us go to where the Asuras are dividing it. For what would become of us, if we were to get no share in it?' Placing Vishnu, (in the shape of) this very sacrifice, at their head, they went (to the Asuras). They then said: 'Let us share in this earth along with yourselves! Let a part of it be ours!' The Asuras replied rather grudgingly: 'As much as this Vishnu lies upon, and no more, we give you!'

Now Vishnu was a dwarf. The gods, however, were not offended at this, but said: 'Much indeed they gave us, who gave us what is equal in size to the sacrifice' ... Having thus enclosed him on all (three) sides, and having placed Agni (the fire) on the east side, they went on worshipping and toiling with it (or him, i.e. Vishnu, the sacrifice). By it they obtained (sam-vid) this entire earth...

—  Shatapatha Brahmana, translated by Julius Eggeling (1900), Kanda I, Adhyaya 2, Brahmana 5, Verses 1–7
Muir states about this legend in the Shatapatha Brahmana that 'Vishnu is represented as a dwarf, and as having, under the form of sacrifice, conquered the whole earth... [this] contains the germ of the story of the Dwarf [i.e. Vamana] incarnation'.[20] This legend is given in relation to the Darsapûrnamâseshtî, or 'New and Full-moon Sacrifices'. The translator, Eggeling, states (footnote 59:1 of the given link) that the above-quoted legend 'represents the Purva-Parigraha, or first enclosing of the altar by a single line being drawn with the wooden sword [a sacrificial instrument called a satasphyam] on each of the three sides'. He also supposes (while admitting he cannot prove it) that the size of Vishnu may represent 'the sun-light, which, on shrinking to a dwarf's size in the evening, is the only means of preservation left to the devas'.

He now strides the (three) Vishnu-strides. He who sacrifices assuredly gratifies the gods. In gratifying the gods by that sacrifice--partly by riks [verses from the RigVeda], partly by yagus [verses from the YajurVeda], partly by oblations--he acquires a share among them; and having acquired a share among them, he goes to them.

And again why he strides the Vishnu-strides, is; Vishnu, truly, is the sacrifice, by striding (vi-kram) he obtained for the gods that all-pervading power (vikrânti) which now belongs to them. By his first step he gained this same (earth), by the second this aërial expanse, and by his last (step) the sky. And this same pervading power Vishnu, as the sacrifice, obtains by his strides for him (the sacrificer): for this reason he strides the Vishnu-strides. Now it is indeed from this (earth) that most (beings) go (upwards)..

—  Shatapatha Brahmana, translated by Julius Eggeling (1900), Kanda I, Adhyaya 9, Brahmana 3, Verses 8-9
This instruction, relating directly to the Vishnu strides mentioned in the Rigveda, is also given in relation to the Darsapūrnamāseshtī, or 'New and Full-moon Sacrifices'. The three strides of Vishnu are not mentioned in direct relation to the legend of Vishnu as a dwarf. Instead, they are mentioned in regard to the performance of sacrifices to consecrate the sacrificial ground (e.g. to drive away the Rakshasas or 'demons' and solidify their own power).

Now when he offers in the evening after sunset, he does so thinking, 'I will offer to the gods of this life-giving juice: we subsist on this which belongs to them.' And when he afterwards takes his evening meal, he eats what remains of the offering, and whereof oblative portions (bali) have been distributed all round; for he who performs the Agnihotra eats only what remains of the offering.

—  Shatapatha Brahmana, translated by Julius Eggeling (1900), Kanda 2, Adhyaya 3, Brahmana 1, Verse 12
This quote shows that 'Bali' is used refer to oblative portions or sacrificial offerings in ritual ceremonies such as the Agnihotra. In combination with 'Bali' being used to refer to taxes (see Taittiriya Brahmana, below), it therefore seems possible these meanings are linked with Bali being a king that loved to perform sacrifices and give sacrificial offerings (e.g. such as three steps of land).

Black Yajurveda: Taittiriya Samhita
See also: Taittiriya Shakha
The gods and the Asuras strove for these worlds; Visnu saw this dwarf, he offered it to its own deity; then he conquered these worlds. One who is engaged in a struggle should offer a dwarf (beast) to Visnu; then he becomes Visnu and conquers these worlds.

— Taittiriya Samhita, translated by Arthur Berriedale Keith (1914), Kanda 2, Prapathaka 1, Section 3
As per the above quote from the Taittirya Samhita, the sacrificial fee for Vishnu is a dwarf-animal (also stated in 1.8.1 (ox), 1.8.8, and 1.8.17). As D.A. Soifer states, the 'series of connections inherent in all this seems to be as follows: Visnu's three steps regain the worlds - Vishnu as a dwarf takes the three steps - a dwarf animal is sacrificed to Visnu to gain the power of this three steps'.[69]

Black Yajurveda: Taittiriya Brahmana
Then the King recites the two dvadasha strotras and the two chaturvimsha. Then the Kshatra power manifests in him very well (udbhidyam), then the citizens easily bring their taxes (bali) to the king.

— Taittiriya Brahmana (Volume 2), translated by R.L. Kashyap (2017), Ashtaka 2, Prapathaka 7, Anuvaka 18, Khandika 3 (p.377)
This quote shows that 'Bali' is used refer to taxes paid to the King. It seems possible that this is linked to the character of Bali being a king (of the Asuras) who - also consistent with the other meaning of 'sacrificial offerings or oblations' - loved to perform sacrifices and give sacrificial offerings (such as land requested by dwarf-Brahmins).

Atharva Veda
Arharva	References	Notes
Samhita	Vishnu: 7.26;[70] Bali (tribute): 3.4.3,[71] 11.1.20,[72] 11.4.19[73]	7.26 is from Rigveda 1.54. 11.1.20 uses the word 'bali-hāra'; 11.4.19 uses 'bali-hṛt' to mean 'tribute'.[74]
Upanishads
Brihadaranyaka Upanishad
These are the three worlds. The organ of speech is this World (The Earth), the mind is the sky, and the vital force is that World (Heaven).
These are the three Vedas. The organ of speech is the RigVeda, the mind is the YajurVeda, and the vital force the SamaVeda.
These are the Gods, the Manes and Men. The organ of speech is the gods, the mind the Manes, and the vital force men.
These are the father, mother and child. The mind is the father, the organ of speech the mother, and the vital force the child.

— Brihadaranyaka Upanishad with commentary of Shankaracharya (translated by Swami Madhavananda, 1934), Section 5, Verses 4-7[75]

Agni, God Of Fire.
The Brihadaranyaka Upanishad is one of the Mukhya or Principal 108 Upanishads.[76][77] From the last book of the Satapatha Brahmana (Kanva recension; this article cites the Madhyandina recension in the section above, which does not contain the Upanishad),[78] it is a treatise on Atman (Soul or Self), and has been commented upon by figures such as Adi Shankar and Madhvacharya.[79][80]

According to this Sruti scripture, the concept of the 'three worlds' does not just refer to physical reality (i.e. ground, atmosphere, and sky). It also has other - more mystical - meanings, including Speech, Mind, and Vital Force. As such, the legend of Vamana striding over the three worlds in two or three steps also may have more mystical meanings, and those provided by the Brihadaranyaka Upanishad seem to be consistent with established Vedic concepts such as Pancha Bhoota (the Hindu classical elements). For example, it is stated by the above-quoted Upanishad that the first step on the earth also represents the organ of speech ('vac' or 'vak'). According to other authoritative - including Sruti sources - the first step, ground, and speech are all represented by Agni (God of Fire; fire-altars are key components of sacrifices):

Sayana states that the first step on the earth is represented by Agni (see above).
The Taittiriya Samhita (Black Yajurveda) 1.7.11 states 'Agni with one syllable won speech'[81] (2.1.4 also explains the symbolic significance of the number three).[18]
The Shatapatha Brahmana (White Yajurveda) 3.2.2.13 states 'Agni is speech'.